Git_Intro.md, before:


# Working with git
#### for sample project: mapdemos

#### NOTE: Wherever you see `USERNAME` below, put your own user name.

## Introduction

Git is a source control system.  It is used to maintain control of files
(typically source code) and make sure that changes are recorded and never lost.
In a typical configuration, we're concerned with three different locations:

1. *your working directory* -- the folder on your machine where
you'll be editing your project.

2. *the local repository* -- hides inside the hidden .git folder in your
working directory.  This is a complete copy of the repository.
Do not directly change anything in the hidden .git folder.  Look, don't touch.

3. *a remote repository* -- a safe store for the project files.
Other team members may also change the files there, so we'll pull down those
changes, and merge them with our changes locally (mostly automatically,
sometimes manually), and we'll also push our changes up to it.
Typically, the remote repository would be hosted on a corporate server, or a cloud server
on the Internet.  Many teams use private repositories on github.com.
The remote repository is typically known by it's URL, for example: <a href="https://github.com/billtrowbridge/mapdemos" target="_blank">https://github.com/billtrowbridge/mapdemos</a>

##### Git weaknesses:

- Git does not itself maintain history across renames or moving files
from directory to directory.  Therefore, it's a good idea to determine and
set up your directory structure before you start adding a lot files
to your project.  It's useful to look at a lot of other public
github repositories to see how they are organized.

- Most of the git commands used below are very simple usages.  The commands
often support many command-line options, and can be very complex.

- It is very VERY important to *never store any secure information* ( passwords, access keys, or access tokens, etc. ) in a repository.  Even if it is later removed, it will still exist in the historical record logs for the file.  These are easy
to retrieve and read.  So avoid putting such secure information in your working directory at all.  And never add, commit,
or push a file with secure information to your repository.

## Set up git and the sample project

(1) Install git from <a href="https://git-scm.com/downloads" target="_blank">https://git-scm.com/downloads</a>

If on Windows, choose the options to install just the Windows stuff.

NOTE: git comes with a built-in GUI Tool called git-gui.  It's not great.
At some later time, you might want to become familiar with that,
or download the "GitHub Desktop" GUI Client (which I sometimes use)
from <a href="https://git-scm.com/downloads/guis" target="_blank">https://git-scm.com/downloads/guis</a>
or try some other gui downloaded from the same place.

Many development environments have git extensions built in.  Both the
Google Android Studio and Microsoft Visual Studio have such extensions.
It's an add-in for Visual Studio.

(2) Make a directory where you will keep some of your "working directories".

This is where you will keep and work on the projects.  I made mine at:
```
C:/Users/USERNAME/Documents/GitHub/`
```

(3) Make a new "working directory" somewhere on your system.  I made mine at:
```
C:/Users/USERNAME/Documents/GitHub/mapdemos
```
This is where we'll work on this particular project.

(4) (optional, or any time)

I have set up a public sample repository on github.
You can use your browser and go to this URL to see it.

<a href="https://github.com/billtrowbridge/mapdemos">https://github.com/billtrowbridge/mapdemos</a>

(5) For these instructions, we'll be doing most of the commands in a command window.

If you have a folder open in Windows Explorer, you can do shift-right-click and
select "Open command window here" to open a command window at that directory.
Or, press the Windows button, enter "cmd" and press enter.
Then enter this command:
```
> cd C:/Users/USERNAME/Documents/GitHub
```
Make sure you're in the command window in that directory.

(6) Enter:
```
> git status
```
The git executable should run, and it should show that there is no repository here.
"git status" is always optional, but we'll be doing it a lot to show
what's going on.
If the git executable does not run, it probably needs to be added to the DOS path.

(7) Configure git so that it knows who you are.

If you don't have a github account, sign up for a free account now.
<a href="https://github.com/" target="_blank">https://github.com/</a>
If you already have a github account, use the name and email that you used for github.
Put your name and email address inside the quotes below.  Omit the brackets.
```
> git config --global user.name "[name]"
> git config --global user.email "[email address]"
```
These settings are stored in a hidden file C:/Users/USERNAME/.gitconfig

(8) Enter:
```
> git clone https://github.com/billtrowbridge/mapdemos
```
It should show "cloning" and eventually "done".
This clones the remote repository from my server to your local repository.
Both will now have the ENTIRE repository, all history, everything.
Git is a distributed source control system, so no git repository is a master.
All are equal.  A very common pattern to use is to have a main repository
out on the internet, and each user has a cloned repository on their own machine.
This is the pattern we will typically use.

(9) Enter:
```
> cd mapdemos
> git status
```
We're now in the the local "working directory" for the mapdemos project.
C:/Users/USERNAME/Documents/GitHub/mapdemos
It should say that the branch is up-to-date.
At this point, you have the whole repository, and you have a working directory
with all the contents.  You can edit/add/delete files as you will.

(10) Enter:
```
> dir
```
This should show files in the working directory, including README.md,
which is a file shown on the main page of the github project.
It is a text file which can also contain markdown code to mark
headings, bold, links, lists, etc.
See <a href="https://help.github.com/articles/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/" target="_blank">https://help.github.com/articles/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/</a>


### The work cycle:

Now that you have a working directory, your local repository, and an association with the remote repository,
you'll be making changes.  This is the process or sequence we will use to keep the repository up to date.

The sequence is change, add, commit, pull, merge, push.

(1) Change files in your working directory.  This includes edit, create, or delete of files.
For example:
```
> echo "This is a new file." > newfile.txt
```

(2) Add files to the local repository.  This picks up new files, edits, and file deletions, even renames.
```
> git add .
```

(3) Commit files to the local repository
```
> git commit -m "Fixed whatever, etc"
```

(4) Pull file changes that anyone else has made from the remote repository.  This is very ***IMPORTANT***, to avoid just overwriting their changes.
```
> git pull
```

(5) Merge differences.  Typically, any differences are automatically merged.  If that's not possible, you'll need to manually merge them.
[TODO: Add more detailed instructions about manually merging.]

(6) Push changes to the remote repository
```
> git push https://github.com/billtrowbridge/mapdemos
```
but, if you cloned a project, it remembers where it came from, so this works:
```
> git push
```
If you haven't cloned it, it's possible to carefully change the configuration file
in the local repository `.git/config` so that it knows the remote repository.


### Extra Information

- Make a brand new empty repository.

Create and move to a new directory, and initialize a repository.
```
> md the_new_directory
> cd the_new_directory
> git init
```

- Make a repository from a directory with a existing project
```
> cd the_project_directory
> git init
> git add .
```
Continue with the regular commit and push commands.

- Add and commit in one step.  If you are only editting files, you can use this command to add and commit in a single step.
WARNING: This does not pick up newly created files, nor newly deleted files.
```
> git commit -a -m "your commit message"
```

- Special files.  In the working directory, you can put certain configuration files.
  + The .gitignore file has configuration information to prevent certain files in working directory from being stored in the repository.
  + The .gitattributes has some additional configuration information.  The most common settings control crlf processing for various operating systems.

- Use a different editor (not vim).  The following links are quite thorough in describing ways to set up an editor that you prefer.

http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2596805/how-do-i-make-git-use-the-editor-of-my-choice-for-commits

https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Customizing-Git-Git-Configuration

If you do get stuck in the vim editor, the following key sequence will usually get you out: `ESC q ! ENTER` .  

### Good Git Help Links

http://classic.scottr.org/presentations/git-in-5-minutes/

https://training.github.com/kit/downloads/github-git-cheat-sheet.pdf

Commit message:

Added credential manager to comment in Git_Intro.md

Git_Intro.md, after:


# Working with git
#### for sample project: mapdemos

#### NOTE: Wherever you see `USERNAME` below, put your own user name.

## Introduction

Git is a source control system.  It is used to maintain control of files
(typically source code) and make sure that changes are recorded and never lost.
In a typical configuration, we're concerned with three different locations:

1. *your working directory* -- the folder on your machine where
you'll be editing your project.

2. *the local repository* -- hides inside the hidden .git folder in your
working directory.  This is a complete copy of the repository.
Do not directly change anything in the hidden .git folder.  Look, don't touch.

3. *a remote repository* -- a safe store for the project files.
Other team members may also change the files there, so we'll pull down those
changes, and merge them with our changes locally (mostly automatically,
sometimes manually), and we'll also push our changes up to it.
Typically, the remote repository would be hosted on a corporate server, or a cloud server
on the Internet.  Many teams use private repositories on github.com.
The remote repository is typically known by it's URL, for example: <a href="https://github.com/billtrowbridge/mapdemos" target="_blank">https://github.com/billtrowbridge/mapdemos</a>

##### Git weaknesses:

- Git does not itself maintain history across renames or moving files
from directory to directory.  Therefore, it's a good idea to determine and
set up your directory structure before you start adding a lot files
to your project.  It's useful to look at a lot of other public
github repositories to see how they are organized.

- Most of the git commands used below are very simple usages.  The commands
often support many command-line options, and can be very complex.

- It is very VERY important to *never store any secure information* ( passwords, access keys, or access tokens, etc. ) in a repository.  Even if it is later removed, it will still exist in the historical record logs for the file.  These are easy
to retrieve and read.  So avoid putting such secure information in your working directory at all.  And never add, commit,
or push a file with secure information to your repository.

## Set up git and the sample project

(1) Install git from <a href="https://git-scm.com/downloads" target="_blank">https://git-scm.com/downloads</a>

If on Windows, choose the options to install just the Windows stuff.

You will also want to install the Credential Manager, which will keep your credentials so you don't need
to re-enter your name and password as frequently.

NOTE: git comes with a built-in GUI Tool called git-gui.  It's not great.
At some later time, you might want to become familiar with that,
or download the "GitHub Desktop" GUI Client (which I sometimes use)
from <a href="https://git-scm.com/downloads/guis" target="_blank">https://git-scm.com/downloads/guis</a>
or try some other gui downloaded from the same place.

Many development environments have git extensions built in.  Both the
Google Android Studio and Microsoft Visual Studio have such extensions.
It's an add-in for Visual Studio.

(2) Make a directory where you will keep some of your "working directories".

This is where you will keep and work on the projects.  I made mine at:
```
C:/Users/USERNAME/Documents/GitHub/`
```

(3) Make a new "working directory" somewhere on your system.  I made mine at:
```
C:/Users/USERNAME/Documents/GitHub/mapdemos
```
This is where we'll work on this particular project.

(4) (optional, or any time)

I have set up a public sample repository on github.
You can use your browser and go to this URL to see it.

<a href="https://github.com/billtrowbridge/mapdemos">https://github.com/billtrowbridge/mapdemos</a>

(5) For these instructions, we'll be doing most of the commands in a command window.

If you have a folder open in Windows Explorer, you can do shift-right-click and
select "Open command window here" to open a command window at that directory.
Or, press the Windows button, enter "cmd" and press enter.
Then enter this command:
```
> cd C:/Users/USERNAME/Documents/GitHub
```
Make sure you're in the command window in that directory.

(6) Enter:
```
> git status
```
The git executable should run, and it should show that there is no repository here.
"git status" is always optional, but we'll be doing it a lot to show
what's going on.
If the git executable does not run, it probably needs to be added to the DOS path.

(7) Configure git so that it knows who you are.

If you don't have a github account, sign up for a free account now.
<a href="https://github.com/" target="_blank">https://github.com/</a>
If you already have a github account, use the name and email that you used for github.
Put your name and email address inside the quotes below.  Omit the brackets.
```
> git config --global user.name "[name]"
> git config --global user.email "[email address]"
```
These settings are stored in a hidden file C:/Users/USERNAME/.gitconfig

(8) Enter:
```
> git clone https://github.com/billtrowbridge/mapdemos
```
It should show "cloning" and eventually "done".
This clones the remote repository from my server to your local repository.
Both will now have the ENTIRE repository, all history, everything.
Git is a distributed source control system, so no git repository is a master.
All are equal.  A very common pattern to use is to have a main repository
out on the internet, and each user has a cloned repository on their own machine.
This is the pattern we will typically use.

(9) Enter:
```
> cd mapdemos
> git status
```
We're now in the the local "working directory" for the mapdemos project.
C:/Users/USERNAME/Documents/GitHub/mapdemos
It should say that the branch is up-to-date.
At this point, you have the whole repository, and you have a working directory
with all the contents.  You can edit/add/delete files as you will.

(10) Enter:
```
> dir
```
This should show files in the working directory, including README.md,
which is a file shown on the main page of the github project.
It is a text file which can also contain markdown code to mark
headings, bold, links, lists, etc.
See <a href="https://help.github.com/articles/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/" target="_blank">https://help.github.com/articles/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/</a>


### The work cycle:

Now that you have a working directory, your local repository, and an association with the remote repository,
you'll be making changes.  This is the process or sequence we will use to keep the repository up to date.

The sequence is change, add, commit, pull, merge, push.

(1) Change files in your working directory.  This includes edit, create, or delete of files.
For example:
```
> echo "This is a new file." > newfile.txt
```

(2) Add files to the local repository.  This picks up new files, edits, and file deletions, even renames.
```
> git add .
```

(3) Commit files to the local repository
```
> git commit -m "Fixed whatever, etc"
```

(4) Pull file changes that anyone else has made from the remote repository.  This is very ***IMPORTANT***, to avoid just overwriting their changes.
```
> git pull
```

(5) Merge differences.  Typically, any differences are automatically merged.  If that's not possible, you'll need to manually merge them.
[TODO: Add more detailed instructions about manually merging.]

(6) Push changes to the remote repository
```
> git push https://github.com/billtrowbridge/mapdemos
```
but, if you cloned a project, it remembers where it came from, so this works:
```
> git push
```
If you haven't cloned it, it's possible to carefully change the configuration file
in the local repository `.git/config` so that it knows the remote repository.


### Extra Information

- Make a brand new empty repository.

Create and move to a new directory, and initialize a repository.
```
> md the_new_directory
> cd the_new_directory
> git init
```

- Make a repository from a directory with a existing project
```
> cd the_project_directory
> git init
> git add .
```
Continue with the regular commit and push commands.

- Add and commit in one step.  If you are only editting files, you can use this command to add and commit in a single step.
WARNING: This does not pick up newly created files, nor newly deleted files.
```
> git commit -a -m "your commit message"
```

- Special files.  In the working directory, you can put certain configuration files.
  + The .gitignore file has configuration information to prevent certain files in working directory from being stored in the repository.
  + The .gitattributes has some additional configuration information.  The most common settings control crlf processing for various operating systems.

- Use a different editor (not vim).  The following links are quite thorough in describing ways to set up an editor that you prefer.

http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2596805/how-do-i-make-git-use-the-editor-of-my-choice-for-commits

https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Customizing-Git-Git-Configuration

If you do get stuck in the vim editor, the following key sequence will usually get you out: `ESC q ! ENTER` .  

### Good Git Help Links

http://classic.scottr.org/presentations/git-in-5-minutes/

https://training.github.com/kit/downloads/github-git-cheat-sheet.pdf
